--- Page 157 ---
147 
 GRADE TWO  
 
Strand  Sub-strand  
 Specific Learning Outcomes  Suggested Learning Experiences   Key Inquiry 
Questions  
1.0 
LISTENING  1.1 Listen  to 
instructions and 
questions  
 
2  less ons  
 
 
 
 By the end of the sub-strand , the 
learner should be able to:  
a) listen attentively to simple 
sequenced instructions  
b) use appropriate non -verbal 
communication cues to indicate 
an understanding  of questions 
and instructions  
c) demonstrate an understanding 
of a set of instructions through 
appropriate responses  
d) demonstrate conventions of 
giving instructions and asking 
questions   Learners attentively listen to a series of instructions and 
interpret effectively(attention to use of non-verbal  
cues) 
 Learners list en to questions and take turns in 
responding to them(using prompts)  
 Learners participate in varied activities and games that 
require them to respond to instructions e.g. Simon says. 
Sing songs e.g. head, shoulder, knees, and toes ( in pairs 
and small groups ) 
 Learners model/role play talking and listening to 
different audiences e.g. school members, family and 
community members(apply skills of social 
conventions)  
 Learners are provided with opportunity to  brainstorm 
on instructions, questions,  and possible res ponses in 
pairs, small groups and whole class.  1) Who gives us 
instructions?  
2) Who asks us 
questions?  
 
 Core Competence to be developed :  
Communication and collaboration : Learners listen to questions and instructions and respond appropriately in pairs and grou ps. 
Learning to learn : Learners model responding to instructions.  
Creativity and critical thinking : Learners think through what they have heard before responding.  
Links to PCIs : Life skills: Skills of knowing and living with 
others - effective commun ication   Links to  Values: Respect  
Links to other learning areas: all learning areas  Suggested Community Service Learning: Learners participate in 
communal activities e.g cultural festivals where they will be expected to act 
on instructions.  

--- Page 158 ---
148 
 Suggested n on-formal activity to support learning: Learners 
participate in games involving instructions with peers  Suggested assessment: question/answer  
Suggested Resources: Audio recordings, manila charts, sentence strips  
 
Suggested Formative Assessment and Rubric  
Exceeding expectations  Meeting expectations  
 Approaching expectations  Below expectations  
Learner  
 always keeps eye contact,  
 completely understands questions 
and instructions,    
 responds a ppropriately and with 
ease 
  uses verbal and non -verbal c ues 
purposefully  Learner  
 keeps eye contact most of the 
time 
 understands and responds 
appropriately to instructions 
and questions  
 uses verbal and non -verbal 
cues  Learner  
 keeps eye contact some of the  
time, slow in comprehending  
 may misinterpret the 
instructions or questions.  
 is hesitant and  use of verbal 
and non-verbal  cues is not 
concise.  Learner  
 is distracted and  fidgety,  
 has difficulty in comprehending and 
interpreting instructions or 
questions,   
 does not use appropriate verbal and 
non-verbal  cues 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 159 ---
149 
 Strand  Sub -strand  
 Specific Learning Outcomes  Suggested Learning Experiences   Key Inquiry Questions  
1.0 
LISTENING  1.2 Word and sentence 
formation  
 
2 lessons  
 
 By the end of the sub -strand, the  
learner should be able to:  
a) identify the n umber of syllables 
in a word  
b) recognize words with similar 
sounds  
c) combine syllables to form words  
d) combine words to make simple 
sentences  
e) appreciate that syllables form 
words  
 
  Learners practice hearing individual 
sounds as they sing  rhymes and recite 
poem s 
 Learners play rhyming and blending 
games with peers e.g. come up with 
words that rhyme.  
 Learners imitate the teacher in 
pronouncing various words ( digraphs , 
consonant clusters, three vowel words)  
 Learners are guided to identify words 
listened to (flip ch art, board)  1) How do we form 
words?  
Core Competence to be developed :  
Communication and collaboration:  learners practice forming words and simple sentences  
Link to  PCIs : Life skills: Skills of knowing and living with 
others - effective communication  Links to values: Respect  
Links to other learning areas: all learning areas  Community Service Learning: learners ask parents/guardians to help them 
form new words and sentences from sounds learnt  
Suggested Non -formal activity to support learning: 
learners  practice songs, tongue twisters, poems in and out of 
class  Suggested assessment: segmenting drills  
Suggested Resources: Audio recordings, manila charts, sentence strips  
 
 
 
 

--- Page 160 ---
150 
 Suggested Formative Assessment and Rubric  
Exceeding expectations  
 Meeting expec tations  
 Approaching expectations  Below expectations  
 
Learner  
 can effectively recognize words with 
similar sounds and use them to form 
simple sentences.  
 easily forms words from syllables and 
makes varied simple sentences  Learner  
 can identify syllables 
in a word  
 can form words from 
syllables and make  
simple sentences.  Learner  
 can identify some syllables in words 
and form words from syllables with 
assistance.  
  needs moderate assistance to form 
simple sentences.  Learner  
 has difficulty iden tifying 
syllables i n some words   
 needs considerable assistance to 
form words and sentences.  
 
Strand  Sub-strand  
 Specific Learning Outcomes  Suggested Learning Experiences   Key Inquiry 
Questions  
1.0 
LISTENING  
 
 1.3 Storytelling  
 
2 lessons  
 By the end of the sub -strand, the  
learner should be able to:  
a) appreciate morals taught through 
different thematic stories  
b) develop vocabulary through 
listening to stories  
c) show empathy with people, places,  
and things  
d) recount key details of a story and 
retell it   Learners listen to a variety o f stories about self, 
family,  and home from peers, resource persons,  
and  teachers  
 Learners respond to questions on the stories told 
(who, what, where)  
 Learners  role play, dramatize or retell stories 
(traditional and modern) listened to  
 Learners record th eir stories and play them for 
the class  
 Learners re -tell stories in groups or whole class  
 Learners discuss the morals learned from stories 
listened to  1) Why do we tell 
stories?  
2) Why are stories 
important to us?  
Core Competence to be developed :   
Communicati on and Collaboration : Learners listen to and retell  stories  
Critical thinking and problem solving : Learners retell stories and role play or dramatize them.                                 

--- Page 161 ---
151 
 Link to PCIs : Life skills: Skills of knowing and 
living with othe rs - effective communication  Link to Values: Respect, unity  
Links to other learning areas:  all learning areas  Suggested Community Service Learning: Learners visit older members of the 
community and listen to stories narrated  
Suggested Non -formal activi ty to support 
learning: learners narrate stories to each other  Suggested assessment : Question/Answer, narration  
 
Suggested Resources: Resource persons, story books, newspaper, magazines, audiovisuals  
 
 
Suggested Formative Assessment and Rubric  
Exceeding  expectations  Meeting expectations  Approaching expectations  Below expectations  
Learner  
 can use learnt  vocabulary to 
recreat e a story orally, in details  
 can include a lesson to be learnt . Learner  
 can retell a story with  detail using 
learnt  vocabulary  
 can  maintaining logical flow  of the 
story  
 can  pick out the moral of the story.  Learner  
 can retell  a story with some detail  
 can maintain logical flow of a story 
with moderate assistance  Learner  
 can mention some characters in a story  
 can  retell a story wi th considerable 
assistance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 162 ---
152 
 Strand  Sub-strand  
 Specific Learning Outcomes  Suggested Learning Experiences   Key Inquiry 
Questions  
1.0 
LISTENING  
 
  1.4 Effective 
communication  
 
2 lessons  
 By the end of the sub -strand, the  
learner should be able to: 
a) listen with increased attention to 
rhymes, songs, conversations and 
stories  
b) listen and communicate effectively 
in varied situations  
c) listen to experiences of others and 
respond appropriately to the 
feelings and ideas expressed  
d) develop an interest in listening to 
texts on varied themes  
  Learners  play action games such as 
Simon says, in small groups  
 Learners engage in  story telling  
 Learners listen to audio or audiovisual  
stories on varied themes.  
 Learners are provided   with 
opportunity for dramatic pl ay  
 Learners listen and pick out 
vocabulary from material listened to  
 Learners listen to daily announcements 
in school and orally recount what they 
heard, in pairs, groups or the whole  
class.  1) Why do we 
communicate?(in 
indigenous 
language)  
2) How do we 
communi cate?  
 
 Core Competence to be developed :   
Communication and Collaboration : Learners share their ideas, feelings and emotions in groups  
Critical thinking and problem solving : Learners practice skills of effective communication.  
 Link to PCIs : Life skills : Skills of knowing and living with 
others - effective communication;  
Citizenship: social cohesion  Link to Values: Respect  
 Links to other learning areas:  all learning areas  Suggested Community Service Learning: learners recite poems on 
topical issues  
 Suggested non -formal activity to support learning: 
Learners express opinions on matters affecting them to peers 
and relevant authorities  Suggested assessment: oral presentation in class  
 Suggested Resources: Visual and audio materials story books, props, picture cards and charts  
 

--- Page 163 ---
153 
 Suggested Formative Assessment and Rubrics  
Exceeding expectations  
 Meeting expectations  Approaching expectations  Below expectations  
Learner  
 consistently uses suitable vocabulary to 
express feelings and talk about 
experiences.  
 identifies and effectively uses non-verbal  
cues in communication.  
 Learner  
 frequently uses suitable 
vocabulary to express 
feelings and talk about 
experiences.  
 uses non-verbal  cues in 
communication  Learner  
 occasionally uses suitable vocabulary to 
express fee lings and talk about 
experiences.  
 Uses some  non-verbal  cues in 
communication  Learner  
 rarely uses suitable vocabulary to 
express feelings and talk about 
experiences.  
 Uses none or very limited  non-verbal  
cues in communication  
 
 
Strand  Sub-strand  
 Specifi c Learning Outcomes  Suggested Learning Experiences   Key Inquiry 
Questions  
1.0 LISTENING  1.5 Conversation  
 
2 lessons  
 By the end of the sub -strand, the  learner 
should be able to:  
a) listen to informational texts and pick 
out the  key details  
b) ask and answer  relevant questions in 
a listening text  
c) build  on the ideas and points of 
others in conversation by linking 
their comments to those of others.  
d) increase the vocabulary range 
through focused listening and 
understanding of general and 
specific details  
e) demon strate respect for others when 
participating in a conversation   Learners practice use of socially 
acceptable language during conversation, 
ask questions using cue words(suc h as 
who what, where, when and why),in 
class, groups and pairs  
 Learners are  assisted in creating audio 
and video recording of stories and poems 
to be listened to   
 Learners   use a variety of activities 
(think pair share, dialogue,  etc.) to 
increase opportu nities for 
conversation,in pairs, groups and whole 
class  
  Learners engage in role play and 
dramatization (theme my family and my 1) Why is it 
impor tant to 
listen to others 
during a 
conversation?  

--- Page 164 ---
154 
 f) appreciate the use of socially 
acceptable language and mannerisms 
in conversation  
 community.)  
 Learners watch short videos featuring 
leaders (in the community) and have a 
follow -up conversation . 
Core Competence:   
Communication and Collaboration : learners participate in classroom conversations  
Critical thinking and problem solving : learners organise their ideas  
Links to PCIs:  Life skills: Skills of  knowing and living with others - effective 
communication;  
Citizenship: Social cohesion  Links to  Values : Respect  
Links to other learning areas :  All learning areas  Suggested Community Service Learning:  learners participate in 
conversations with older me mbers in the community  
Suggested non -formal activity to support learning: learners engage each other 
in informal conversations  Suggested assessment: The teacher could provide topics that become 
the basis  for conversations.  
Suggested Resources : Audio and  visual recorders, listening passages  
 
Suggested Formative Assessment and Rubric  
Exceeding expectations  Meeting expectations  Approaching expectations  Below expectations  
Learner  
 can express self  effortlessly on the 
specified thematic area  
  uses of word s and  sentences in 
speech  accurately  
 creatively uses language,  
  speaks with ease  
  listens and responds appropriately to 
others  Learner  
 can use learnt  vocabulary correctly to 
organize and express self on the specified 
thematic area  
  uses correct word ord er but makes minor 
errors that do not affect overall meaning  
 is confident, listens  to others and  
provides appropriate responses  Learner  
  can use some learnt  
vocabulary to organize and 
express self on the 
specified thematic area  
 Makes  minor errors in 
word order and sentence 
formation that affect the 
overall meaning  Learner  
  has difficulty in using 
learnt  vocabulary 
correctly to organize and 
express self on the  
specified thematic area  
 Makes s ignificant errors in 
sentence construction  
 
 
 

--- Page 165 ---
155 
 Strand  Sub-strand  Specific Learning Outcomes  Suggested Learning Experiences   Key Inquiry Questions  
2.0 
SPEAKING  2.2 Responding to 
questions and 
instructions  
 
2 lessons  
 
 By the end of the sub -strand, the  learner 
should be able to:  
a) respond confidently to questions  and 
instructions on varied themes   
b) use verbal and non -verbal cues in 
responding appropriately to instructions 
and questions  
c) ask questions to seek clarity on 
instructions  
d) demonstrate willingness  to answer 
questions and follow instructions   Learners role play giving and 
responding to instructions (pay attention 
to pronunciation and accuracy with 
words) in pairs and  groups.  
 Learners use displayed  word charts and 
pictures with instructions and use it as a 
trigger for discussion  
 Learners play language game s involving 
responding to instructions and 
answering questions(songs, games 
following a particular pattern) in pairs 
and  groups.  1) How do you 
respond when asked 
to do something?  
2) Why do we give 
instructions?  
 
 Core Competence to be developed:  
Communication and collaboration: learners respond to questions and instructions  
Digital Literacy : learners audio -record themselves giving instructions  
Critical thinking and problem solving : learners decide on the best way to respond to given instructions and questions  
Link to PCIs : Life skills: Skills of knowing and living with 
others - effective communication  
Citizenship: Social cohesion  Links to values: respect  
Links to other learning areas:  All learning areas  Community Service Learning: learners practice lang uage use during 
communal activities  
Suggested Non -formal activity to support learning: 
learners practice giving and taking instructions with peers  Suggested Assessment: question and answer, ability to take instructions  
Suggested resources:  audiotapes /videos, word chart, resource person – Community leader  
 
 
 
 

--- Page 166 ---
156 
  
Suggested Formative Assessment and Rubric  
Exceeding expectations  Meet ing expectations  Approaching expectations  Below expectations  
Learner  
 is highly attentive  
 responds appropriately to instructio ns 
and questions  
 uses verbal and non -verbal cues 
purposef ully, with confidence and 
ease.  Learner  
 is attentive  
  responds appropriately to 
instructions and questions  
  uses verbal and non -verbal 
cues appropriately  
  is confident.  Learner  
 is moderately atten tive 
 is slow in comprehending  
  may misinterpret the instruction or 
question.  
 is hesitant and use of verbal and non-
verbal  cues is not concise.  Learner  
 lacks concentration and confidence  
  has difficulty in comprehending and 
interpretin g instructions or q uestions  
  does not use appropriate verbal and non-
verbal  cues.  
 
 
Strand  Sub-strand  Specific Learning Outcomes  Suggested Learning Experiences   Key Inquiry Questions  
2.0 
SPEAKING  2.3 Phonological 
Awareness  
 
4 lessons  
 By the end of the sub -strand, the  
learner should be able to:  
a) recognize and say multiple 
letter -sounds to make 
syllables and words  
b) blend  and segment syllables  
correctly to form words.  
c) use appropriate words to 
make short,  meaningful 
sentences  
d) appreciate the role of 
blending and segmenting i n 
forming sentences   Learners sound  sight words representing 
multi sounds  individually, in pairs and 
groups.  
 Learners blend syllables to form words and 
sentences(blending and segmenting drills) 
individually, in pairs and groups,  
 Learners play auditory dis crimination  
games to enable them to  listen to different 
sounds   
 Learners give words that rhyme  
 Learners are guided to make a list of all the 
sounds they can hear from the 
environment(My home, my  community)  1) What are some of the 
sounds we hear?  
2) Which word s contain 
these sounds?  
Core Competences to be developed:  
Communication and Collaboration : learners work in pairs and groups  to identify rhyming words  
Digital literacy:  learners listen to audio -recorded sounds and words  

--- Page 167 ---
157 
 Link to PCIs : Life skills: Skil ls of knowing and living with 
others - effective communication  Link to values : Unity, respect, responsibility  
 
Links to other learning areas: all learning areas  Suggested community service Learning: learners r ead short stories to 
parents and other member s of the community.  
Suggested Non -formal activity to support learning: 
learners practice sounding letters with peers in and out of 
class  Suggested assessment: Form words and sentences  
Suggested resources: Audio and Audiovisual  aids, Storybooks, Charts,  Pictures  
 
Suggested Formative Assessment and Rubric  
Exceeding expectations  Meeting expectations  Approaching expectations  Below expectations  
Learner  
accurately recognises , pronounces, 
blends and segments words to 
syllables.  Learner  
recognises, pronounc es, 
blends and segments words to 
syllables.  Learner  
is slow in recognising , pronouncing, 
blending and segmenting words to 
syllables.  Learner  
has difficulty in recognising , 
pronouncing, blending and segmenting 
words to syllables.  
 
Strand  Sub-strand  Spec ific Learning Outcomes  Suggested Learning Experiences   Key Inquiry Questions  
2.0 SPEAKING  2.4 Talk about  
 
2 lessons  
 By the end of the sub -strand, the  
learner should be able to:  
a) confidently talk about 
characters and events in a  story 
or text  
b) relate c haracters and events in a 
story  to  real life experience  
c) demonstrate interest to address 
familiar people using 
appropriate verbal and non -
verbal expressions.   Learners discuss characters and events in a 
thematic story(prediction of events, seeking 
clarifi cation by asking questions)  
 Learners role play greeting  people of 
different status showing appropriate 
emotions (My family, my community)  
 Learners are prompted to retell  stories 
(creativity, turn -taking, vocabulary practice)  
 Learners recreate stories usi ng different 
media ndividually, in pairs and groups.  1) How can we talk to 
others in a proper 
way?  
 

--- Page 168 ---
158 
 Core Competences to be developed:  
Communication and Collaboration : learners  talk about varied experiences  
Digital literacy : learners discuss stories from dif ferent media  
Link to PCIs: Life skills: Skills of knowing and living with others - effective 
communication  
Citizenship : social cohesion  Link to Values: Responsibility, Integrity , Respect  
 
Links to other learning areas: All learning areas  Suggested commu nity service Learning:  
learners visit a resource person and talk about an issue in the community  
Suggested Non -formal activity to support learning: learners talk about 
personal experiences with peers  Suggested assessment: Panel discussion on an issue affe cting the 
communitye.g jigger infestation, malaria  
Suggested resources: Audio and Audio visual aids,  
Resource persons   
 
Suggested Formative Assessment and Rubric  
Exceeding expectations  Meeting expectations  
 Approaching expectations  Below expectations  
 
Learner  
 speaks clearly and audibly and with ease  
  uses of words and sentences in speech 
accurately  
 creatively uses language  
  listens and responds appropriately to others  Learner  
 speaks clearly with confidence  
  generally uses  correct word order but 
makes m inor errors that do not affect 
overall meaning.  
  listens to others and  provides 
appropriate responses  Learner  
 Speaks hesitantly.   
 Makes m inor 
inaccuracies in word 
order and sentence 
formation that affect 
the overall meaning  Learner  
 speaks without 
clarity  
 lacks confidence  
 makes  significant 
errors in  sentence 
construction  
 
 
 
 

--- Page 169 ---
159 
 Strand  Sub-strand  Specific Learning Outcomes  Suggested Learning Experiences   Key Inquiry Question(s)  
2.0 
SPEAKING  2.5 Presentation skills  
 
2 lessons  
 
 
 
 By the end of the sub -strand, the  
learner should be able to:  
a) express self appropriately 
using acquired vocabulary  
to communicate effectively  
b) relate various community 
activities in order in which 
they occur  
c) use appropriate tonal 
variation, articulation and 
stress to express se lf-
confidently  
d) recall ideas on the themes in a 
logical manner   Learners  express personal feelings orally 
using the learnt vocabulary  
 Learners are encouraged to participate in 
speaking competitions  
 Learners practise making connections using 
transition word s(relating to months, special 
days e.g birthdays, cultural events,planting 
seasons, religious festivals)  
 Learners  identify good and poor 
presentation skills(videos recording of 
presentations or role playing by teacher)  
 Learners present poems and sing song s on 
various themes  1) What does a good 
presenter do?  
 
 
 Core -Competence to be developed:  
 Communication and Collaboration : learners practice speaking before their peers  
Critical thinking and problem solving: learners organize their presentations  
Link to P CIs and Values: Life skills: Skills of knowing and living with others - 
effective communication  Link to values:  Respect, love  
Link to other subjects:  All learning areas  
 Suggested Community Service Learning:  learners express 
feelings with parents/ guard ians  
Non-Formal Activity to support learning through application:  learners engage 
in informal oral presentations  Suggested Assessment : matching pictures with events, 
question/answer  
Suggested resources :  audio visual aids, role models, pictures of var ious events  
 
 
 
 

--- Page 170 ---
160 
 Suggested Formative Assessment and Rubric  
Exceeding expectations  Meeting expectations  Approaching expectations  Below expectations  
Learner  
 always presents i deas in order.  
 speaks clearly and audibly, using learnt  
vocabulary  
 keeps eye con tact and maintains good 
posture.  
 initiates response s 
  listens to and answers questions clearly, 
completely and with  ease.  
 independently explores and uses new 
transition words to sequence story or event.  Learner  
 presents ideas in order  
 speaks clearly and audibly  
  uses learnt  vocabulary correctly.  
 keeps eye contact and maintains  
good posture.  
 listens to and answers questions 
clearly  and completely  
 uses the learnt transition words 
appropriately  with minimal 
assistance.  Learner  
 presents some  ideas in order . 
 speaks clearly and audibly  
 makes some eye contact.  
 listens to and answers some 
questions but neither  clearly 
nor completely  
 uses the learnt transition words 
with moderate assistance.  Learner  
 does not present ideas  in order.  
 speaks  inaudibly and withou t clarity  
 does not use learnt  vocabulary 
correctly.  
 does not look at audience  
 listens to but does not answer 
questions clearly and completely  
 uses the learnt transition words with 
considerable assistance.  
 
 
Strand  Sub-strand  
 Specific Learning Outcomes   Suggested Learning Experiences  Key Inquiry Questions  
3.0 READING  
 3.1 Paired reading  
 
4 lessons  
 By the end of the sub -strand, the  
learner should be able to:  
a) assess self on reading speed and 
fluency  
b) provide feedback on peer’s reading  
c) ask questions to c onfirm and extend 
understanding of material read  
d) make predictions before and during 
reading  
e) appreciate the importance of turn -
taking and listening to peers as they 
read  Learners read aloud to each other in 
pairs  
 Learners ask each other  questions 
about wha t they have read  
 Learners practice error correction 
procedure when supporting each 
other’s reading(making predictions, 
asking questions, turn taking)  1) What is a good 
speed for reading?  

--- Page 171 ---
161 
 Core competencies to be developed:  
Communication and collaboration : learners cooperate to support peer reading  
Self- efficacy : learners develop confidence in their reading ability  
Link to PCIs:  Life skills: Skills of knowing and living with others - effective 
communication  Link to values: Respect, responsibility  
 
Links to o ther learning areas  All learning areas  
 Suggested community service learning: learners pair with friends in the 
community and practice reading  
Suggested non-formal  activity to support learning: learners read  story books 
to each other  Suggested assessment:  learners retell what they have  read, 
question/answer  
Suggested resources : charts, newspapers , readers, magazines  
 
Suggested Formative Assessment and Rubric  
Exceeding expectations  
 Meeting expectations  Approaching expectations  Below expectations  
 
Learne r  
 consistently and accurately reads 
aloud a story or text with expressive 
interpretation.  
 easily detects reading errors.  
  reads fluently at an appropriate 
speed.  Learner  
 reads aloud a story or text with 
expressive interpretation.  
 can detect reading error s. 
 reads at an appropriate speed . Learner  
 reads aloud a story or text with minimal 
expressive interpretations.  
 cannot easily detect reading errors.  
 can detect errors with considerable 
assistance.  
 reads at an inappropriate  speed  Learner  
 hesitantly reads a loud a story or 
text without expressive 
interpretation.  
 cannot detect any reading error.  
 reads haltingly.  
 
Strand  Sub-strand  
 Specific Learning Outcomes   Suggested Learning Experiences  Key Inquiry Questions  
3.0 READING  
 3.2 Group Reading  
 
3 lessons  
 By the end of the sub -strand, 
the  learner should be able to:  
a) read texts collectively with 
accuracy, fluency,  and 
comprehension   Learners find answers to 
questions from texts read using 
think - pair-share  
 Learners reading is supported  
through guiding questions e.g. 1) What is the importance 
of reading in groups?  

--- Page 172 ---
162 
 b) develop peer learning skills 
of self-assessment   
c) improve confidence through 
peer support in group 
reading  
d) develop an interest in 
reading collectively in and 
out of class  who, what, where?  
 Learners are divided into 
reading teams to facilitate peer 
learning and support  
 Learners retell story, events 
read in pairs and small groups  
 
Core competencies to be developed:  
Communication and Collaboration : learners work in groups to  read various materials  
Self-effica cy: learners develop confidence in reading through group support  
Link to PCIs:  Life skills: Skills of knowing and living with others - 
effective communication  Link to values: Respect, responsibility  
 
Links to other learning areas: All learning areas  
 Suggested community service learning: learners participate in reading contests  
Suggested non-formal  activity to support learning: library reading 
during learners’ free time  Suggested assessment : Peer Assessment , question/answer, retelling a story read  
Sugges ted resources : Readers, newspapers , journals   
 
Suggested Formative Assessment and Rubric  
Exceeding expectations  Meeting expectations  Approaching expectations  Below expectations  
Learner  
 uses guiding questions to  accurately 
identify  the main idea in a t ext. 
 applies  social skills of working in 
groups (turn taking) to participate in 
a group reading.  
 effectively responds to questions 
after group reading.  Learner  
 uses guiding questions to 
identify the main idea in a text.  
 can apply social skills of 
working in groups to participate 
in a group reading.  
 can respond to questions after 
group reading.  Learner  
 needs assistance to identify the 
main idea in a text.  
 requires guidance to work 
effectively in groups.  
 requires assistance to respond 
to questions after gro up 
reading.  Learner  
 needs considerable assistance to 
identify the main idea in a text.  
 requires constant monitoring to 
participate in a group  task. 
 can respond to questions from 
group reading with considerable 
assistance.  

--- Page 173 ---
163 
  
Strand  Sub-strand  Specific Lear ning Outcomes   Suggested Learning Experiences  Key Inquiry 
Questions  
3.0 READING  
 3.3 Silent reading  
 
 
3 lessons  
 By the end of the sub -strand, the  
learner should be able to:  
a) read texts  and passages silently  
b) read silently showing sustained 
focus for l onger periods (15 -20 
minutes)  
c) predict the meaning  of unfamiliar 
words  
d) answer comprehension questions 
from texts read  
e) develop an interest in reading 
texts for enjoyment   Learners are assisted  in  developing 
silent reading skills for efficient 
reading(through  guiding questions, 
timing reading)  
 Learners discuss questions after silent 
reading in pairs and groups  
 Learners answer comprehension 
questions from texts read  
 Learner should be provided  with 
follow -up activities for sustained silent 
reading( e.g retell wh at has been read)  
 Learners could be shown a picture 
spark that tells the same story ( a 
wedding ceremony)  1) When do we read 
silently?  
 
Core competencies to be developed:  
Communication and collaboration : learners discuss questions and meaning of words  
Link to PCIs:  Life skills: Skills of knowing and living with others - 
effective communication  Link to values: Responsibility, respect  
 
Links to other learning area s: All learning areas  
 Suggested community service learning: Engage in silent reading at home  
Suggested non-formal  activity to support learning: learners read story 
books  Suggested assessment : Question/answer, filling gaps  
Suggested resources : Readers, magazines, newspapers, journals, story books, class readers  
 
 
 

--- Page 174 ---
164 
 Suggested Formative Assessment and  Rubric  
Exceeding expectations   Meeting expectations  Approaching expectations  Below expectations  
Learner  
 effectively answers 
comprehension questions 
from silent reading.  
 reads for sustained period.  
 effectively engages in 
discussion after silent reading . Learner  
 answers comprehension 
questions from silent reading.  
 has considerable attention 
span while reading silently.  
 can participate in discussions 
after silent reading.  Learner  
 needs assistance to answer 
questions from silent reading.  
 has limited atte ntion span while 
reading silently.  
 requires guidance to participate 
in discussions.  Learner  
 finds difficulty answering comprehension 
questions from silent reading.  
 is highly distracted while reading silently.  
 finds it difficult to contribute to 
discussion s after reading silently.  
 
Strand  Sub-strand  Specific Learning Outcomes   Suggested Learning Experiences  Key Inquiry Questions  
3.0 READING  
 3.4 Answering 
comprehension 
questions  
 
3 lessons  
 By the end of the sub -strand, the  
learner should be able to:  
a) locat e specific details in 
response to questions from 
texts read  
b) summarise  texts read by 
identifying main ideas  
c) determine  the meaning  of 
unknown words in context   Learners  respond to comprehension 
questions from texts on varied themes  
 Learners relate personal experiences to 
a story read  
 Learners  use context clues to 
determine word meanings  
 Learners are guided to summarise   texts  
by retelling or identifying the main 
ideas  1) Why is it important to 
understand the 
meaning of what you 
read?  
Core competencies to be developed:  
Communication and collaboration : learners summarise  and answer comprehension questions  
Link to PCIs:  Life skills: Skills of knowing and living with others - 
effective communication  Link to values : Respect, responsibility  
 
Links to other learni ng areas All learning areas  
 Suggested community service learning: learners r ead various texts in the 
community e.g. posters, billboards  
Suggested non-formal  activity to support learning: learners share 
information from texts read with peers in and out of  the classroom  Suggested assessment : Question/answer, filling in blanks  
Suggested resources : Readers, newspapers, magazines, journals  

--- Page 175 ---
165 
 Suggested Formative Assessment and Rubric  
Exceeding expectations  Meeting expectations  Approaching expectations  Below exp ectations  
Learner  
 responds to comprehension 
questions with ease.  
 effectively uses context clues 
to determine word meanings.  
 identifies the main idea from 
the material read.  Learner  
 responds to comprehension 
questions.  
 uses context clues to determine 
word meanings.  
 can identify the main idea from 
the material read.  Learner  
 can respond to comprehension 
questions with assistance.  
 can sometimes determine word 
meaning in context.  
 has difficulty identifying the 
main idea from materials read.  Learner  
 needs co nsiderable assistance to 
comprehend questions and determine 
word meanings from context clues.  
 is hardly able to pick out main ideas 
from materials read unless with 
considerable  assistance.  
 
Strand  Sub-strand  
 Specific Learning Outcomes   Suggested Learnin g Experiences  Key Inquiry 
Questions  
4.0 WRITING  4.1 Word and 
sentence formation  
  
3 lessons  
 By the end of the sub -strand, the  
learner should be able to:  
a) use familiar words and 
phrases  to write simple 
sentences  
b) use the correct noun and 
verb form in  m aking 
sentences  
c) identify and write upper and 
lower case letters in words 
and sentences correctly  
d) develop an interest  in 
writing for pleasure   Learners are guided to build simple sentence 
structures through identification of keywords  
 Learners are guided  to identify nouns and 
verbs in a sentence(subject/verb agreement)  
 Learners re - organize jumbled words to form 
logical sentences (paragraph, punctuation)  
 Learners written work is displayed to indicate 
writing progress  
 Learners are guided to use writing,  and ot her 
forms of representing for a variety of 
functions i.e. ask questions, express feelings, 
opinions,  etc, in pairs, groups and whole class  1) How do we 
form a 
sentence?  
 
Core -Competence to be developed:  
Communication and collaboration :  learners perform  col laborative activities e.g. rearranging sentences to form paragraphs  
Link to PCIs and Values: Life skills: Skills of knowing and living with 
others - effective communication  Link to Values: Respect  

--- Page 176 ---
166 
 Links to other learning areas:  All learning areas  
 Sugges ted Community Service Learning: learners make  a list of items e.g. 
shopping list and share with parents. Try and share simple requests in written 
format.  
Suggested non -formal activity to support learning: learners practice 
making written requests to peers  Suggested  Assessment : Write a short paragraph on a given thematic topic  
Suggested Resources:  Tape recorder, flash cards, sentence strips, books, pencils  
 
Suggested Formative Assessment and Rubric  
Exceeding expectations  Meeting expectations  Approaching expectations  Below expectations  
Learner  
 always differentiates lower and 
upper case letters  
 makes meaningful sentences by 
combining words learnt  Learner  
 differentiat es lower and 
upper case letters   
 makes meaningful sentences 
by combining words learnt  Learner  
 sometimes mixes  lower and 
upper case letters  
 makes meaningful sentences by 
combining words learnt  with 
moderate assistance.  Learner  
 is inconsistent in use of lower and 
upper case letters in sentences   
 combines words learnt  and makes 
meaningful sent ences with 
considerable assistance  
 
 
Strand  Sub-strand  
 Specific Learning Outcomes   Suggested Learning Experiences  Key Inquiry Questions  
4.0 WRITING  4.2 Spelling 
instruction  
 
3 lessons  
 
  By the end of the sub -strand, the  
learner should be able to:  
a) write an increasing number of 
words and spell them correctly  
b) spell words with short and long 
vowel sounds and consonant 
clusters  
c) use phonic knowledge to spell 
and write familiar and 
unfamiliar words   Learners write  newly learned words on 
a word tree  
 Learner should be guided  on the use of 
spelling strategies including knowledge 
of letter, sound correspondences,  and 
common letter patter ns 
 Learners identify spelling errors in own 
writing or unknown texts and provide 
correct spelling(spacing, punctuation,  
and spelling)  1) Why is it important 
to spell words 
correctly?  

--- Page 177 ---
167 
 d) use simple editing strategies to 
correct spelling in simple 
sentences  
e) appreciate the importance of 
correct spelling in writing  
  Learners practice spelling sight words  
 Learners participate in spelling 
challenge contest, individually, in pairs 
and  gro ups 
Core -Competence to be developed:  
Communication and collaboration : learners play spelling games  
Link to PCIs : Life skills: Skills of knowing and living with others - 
effective communication  Link to values:  Respect, responsibility  
Links to other learning areas:  All learning areas  
 Suggested Community Service Learning: learners practice spelling newly 
learned words in the community  
Suggested non -formal activity to support learning: learners  engage in 
free w riting activities in and out of class  Suggested  assessment : learners participate in spelling challenge, dictation  
Suggested Resources:  Flash cards, word trees, writing materials, stencil  
 
Suggested Formative Assessment and Rubric  
Exceeding expectations  Meeting expectations  Approaching expectations  Belo w expectations  
Learner  
 applies phonic knowledge to 
consistently spell words 
correctly.  
 effectively uses editing strategies 
to correct spelling in simple 
sentences  Learner  
 applies phonic knowledge to 
spell most words correctly.  
 can use editing strategies to 
correct spelling in simple 
sentences  Learner  
 applies phonic knowledge to 
spell some words correctly.  
 can use editing strategies to 
correct spelling in simple 
sentences  with moderate 
assisstance  Learner   
 has difficulty applying phonic 
knowledge to spell words 
correctly.  
 has difficulty in using editing 
strategies to correct spelling in 
simple sentences  
 
 
 

--- Page 178 ---
168 
 Strand  Sub-strand  
 Specific Learning Outcomes   Suggested Learning Experiences  Key Inquiry Questions  
4.0 WRITING  4.3 Handwriting  
 
 3 lessons  
 By the end of the sub -strand, 
the  learner should be able to:  
a) use conventional spacing 
between words  
b) use basic punctuation 
appropriately  
c) join letters to form  
meaningful words  
d) use  capitalization 
appropriately  
e) appreciate the importance 
of clear and legible 
handwriting   Learners  use a variety of handwriting 
activities to practice letter patterns,  word 
patterns,  and sentence patterns  
 Learners observe and practice handwriting as 
is displayed  
 Learners engage in  a variety of handwriting  
activities to improve their writing (capital and 
small letters, commas and full stop), in groups, 
pairs and individually  
 Learners participate in writing contests in 
class, at school  
 Learners write dictated sentences,  paying 
attent ion to the spacing  (between and within 
words), punctuation and legibility.  1) Why should I write 
well?  
 
Core -Competence to be developed:  
Communication and collaboration :  learners practice handwriting in pairs and groups  
Learning to learn:  learners compare their writing with others and identify areas for improvement  
 
Link to PCIs:  Learner support programmes:Guidance and coaching - as 
they participate in activities such as writing contests  Link to values: Responsibility, respect  
Links to other learning areas : All learning areas  
 Suggested Community Service Learning: learners practice handwriting by 
communicating requests in written format  
Suggested Non -formal activity to support learning: learners practice 
handwriting in and out of class  Suggested  assessmen t: teacher to provide a written text modelling  good 
handwriting for the learners to copy in their book  
Suggested Resources:  Books, pencils, crayons, word puzzles, story books  
 

--- Page 179 ---
169 
  
Suggested Formative Assessment and Rubric  
Exceeding expectations  
 Meeting exp ectations  
 Approaching expectations  Below expectations  
 
Learner  
 perfectly shapes and spaces letters and 
words.  
 applies rules of punctuation.   
 neatly presents written work  Learner  
 shapes and spaces  letters  
correctly  
 applies rules of punctuation.   
 write s legibly and neatly  Learner  
 shapes and spaces  some letters 
and words correctly.  
 someti mes punctuates 
appropriately  
 presents fairly legible work.  Learner  
 Is  inconsistent in shaping and 
spacing letters.  
 Does  not punctuate 
appropriately  
 presents  work  that  is not very 
legible.  
 
Strand  Sub-strand  Specific Learning Outcomes   Suggested Learning Experiences  Key Inquiry Questions  
4.0 WRITING  4.4 Creative writing  
 
4 lessons  
 By the end of the sub -strand, 
the learner should be able to:  
a) apply knowledge of creative 
writing process to write 
own texts  
b) write clearly with a variety 
in sentence structure, 
length,  and pattern  
c) use appropriate connecting 
words to sequence 
sentences  
d) exhibit artistic expression 
through writing  
e) choose to write 
independently during fr ee  Learners are  guided  on the 
writing process through picture 
stories in scrapbooks / journals 
(planning, drafting, edited, 
proofreading , publishing)  
 Learners  give feedback on their 
classmate's  writing  
 Learners practice sequencing 
sente nces to form creative texts in 
pairs and groups  
 Learners are provided  with 
pictures as a trigger to creative 
writing  
 Learners imagination could be 
stimulated  through games e.g. 1) How do we organize 
ideas to m ake a story 
interesting?  

--- Page 180 ---
170 
 choice activities  
 story train as a basis for writing, 
picture spark  
Core -Competence to be developed:  
Communication and collaboration:  learners organize and write their thoughts  in pairs and groups  
Creativity and critical thinking :  learners look, think and write based on a given picture prompt  
Link to PCIs:  Learner support programmes:Guidance and coaching - as 
they participate in activities such as creative writing contests  Link to values: Respect, unity, self -esteem  
Links to other learning areas:  all learning areas  
 Suggested Community Service L earning: learners p articipate in creative writing 
competitions and practice writing for pleasure and enjoyment  
Suggested Non -formal activity to support learning: learners share 
withwriting with peers  Suggested  assessment : Learners write a story based on a given picture story.  
Suggested Resources:  Newspaper cutting, story maps, print materials, books, glue, scissors, sentence strips  
 
Suggested Formative Assessment and Rubric  
Exceeding expectations  Meeting expectations  Approaching expectations  Below expec tations  
Learner  
 Consistently presents ideas 
creatively  
 is always comprehensible   
 effectively makes use of 
learnt  vocabulary to 
organize ideas  
 consistently spells 
correctly.  Learner  
 presents ideas in logical 
order  
 is generally 
comprehensible   
 makes use of learnt  
vocabulary to organize 
ideas.  
 Makes a few spelling 
mistakes  Learner  
 presents  some ideas in their 
logical order  
 is comprehensible some of the time  
 makes use of some learnt  
vocabulary  
 makes many  spelling mistakes.  Learner  
 presents ideas haphaz ardly  
 is incomprehensible  
 makes  major errors in 
punctuation  
 makes numerous spelling 
mistakes  
 
 
 